Added Workshop 4 - Arithmetic Progression (#2)
CodeYourFuture/CodewarsWorkshops: Problem_4_ArithmeticProgression/ArithmeticProgression.md

author: Tony Beaumont
summary: Problem Solving: Find the missing number
id: problem-04
categories: coding
environments: Web
status: Published
feedback link: mailto:a.j.beaumont@aston.ac.uk

# Problem Solving: Find the missing number

## Introduction

This series of problem solving exercises are based on problems found on Codewars [https://www.codewars.com/](https://www.codewars.com/) or Hackerank [https://www.hackerrank.com/dashboard](https://www.hackerrank.com/dashboard).

### What you should already know

> You should have attended the previous two problem solving sessions. You will have learned the outline procedure for solving problems by:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You should have attended the previous three problem solving sessions. You will have learned the outline procedure for solving problems by:
```

- **Step 2**: we use the difference to find an **unexpected** value in the sequence.

### Example One

Lets say we are given the list `[1, 5, 7, 9]`

#### Ex1, Step 1

In the full sequence `[1, 3, 5, 7, 9]`, the difference is `2` (easy for us to see but not easy for a computer).

#### Ex 1, Step 2

To find the missing number, we start with the first item in the list, which is `1`, add the difference (`1 + 2`) and **expect** the next value in the sequence to be `3`. The next value is **unexpectedly** `5`, so we know the **missing number** is `3`.

### Example Two

Lets say we are given the list `[1, 3, 5, 9]`

#### Ex 2, Step 1

In the full sequence `[1, 3, 5, 7, 9]`, the difference is `2` (again, easy for us to see but not easy for a computer).

#### Ex 2, Step 2

To find the missing number, we start with the first item in the list, which is `1`, add the difference (`1 + 2`) and **expect** the next value in the sequence to be `3`. We **repeat** that exercise, adding `3 + 2 = 5` and then `5 + 2 = 7` until we see the **unexpected** value which is `9` and not `7`. The missing value is `7`.

## How to find the 'difference'

> In the full sequence `[1, 3, 5, 7, 9]`, the **difference** is 2. We can also think of it as the "gaps" between terms being the list `[2, 2, 2, 2]`. Note that the length of the full sequence is `5` but the number of "gaps" is only `4` (ie, length of the list `[2, 2, 2, 2]`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the full sequence `[1, 3, 5, 7, 9]`, the **difference** is 2. We can also think of it as the "gaps" between terms being the list `[2, 2, 2, 2]`. Note that the length of the full sequence is `5` but the number of "gaps" is only `4` (i.e., length of the list `[2, 2, 2, 2]`).
```

In the version we are given, with one value missing, `[1, 5, 7, 9]`, the differences are `[4, 2, 2]`. The first difference is the largest one, so it is easy for us to see that there is a number missing from the sequence between `1` and `5`.

### Can we find an algorithm to calculate the difference?

Remember, the problem specification said:

```console
The missing term will never be the first or last one.
```

This is important to our solution.

> 1. How many ways can you find to compute the **difference** between terms from the given list (ie the list with one value missing)?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. How many ways can you find to compute the **difference** between terms from the given list (i.e. the list with one value missing)?
```

> 1. We can reply on the first and last values as being present, so can you compute the difference using only the first and last values?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. We can rely on the first and last values as being present. Can you compute the difference using only the first and last values?
```

## Computing the difference

> There is a way of computing the difference easily from the first and last value in the sequence. It relies on the fact that given the full sequence has `len` values in it, there are `len - 1` "gaps" and this gap is constant (ie it is the same every time).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is a way of computing the difference easily from the first and last value in the sequence. It relies on the fact that given the full sequence has `len` values in it, there are `len - 1` "gaps" and this gap is constant (i.e. it is the same every time).
```
